Hi there! I'm Tom Peperkamp,
a Platform Product Owner.
That's right, platforms
should be treated as products!
Platform Engineering is a
new and rapidly evolving field.
To help you navigate this space,
I've created a video
series that dives into
the why, what and how
of Platform Engineering.
This series pulls together insights
from top-quality public resources,
organizing them
into focused topics
to create a 'crash course'
in Platform Engineering.
Each video is curated to support
your Platform Engineering journey,
offering practical
knowledge and insights
to deepen your understanding
of its principles and potential.
Let's get started!
Throughout my talk,
I'll be referencing content from
leading voices in our industry.
A big shout out
to these rockstars
for their amazing blogs
and conference talks!
You'll find all the sources
listed at the end of the video.
These references
aren't just for ethics,
they're packed with valuable insights
that I highly recommend exploring.
So, if you enjoy this video,
definitely check them
out and dive deeper!
Alright, let's talk
about direction.
Without a clear idea
of where you're going,
even the best team
can feel lost at sea.
Are you looking to
shorten your time-to-market?
Deliver more value
with each release?
Or maybe just bring a little
sanity to your development cycles?
In this video, "From Product
Vision to Product Goal",
we'll chart a course from the
big, inspiring vision of your platform
to the concrete, actionable goals
that drive your team's daily work.
We'll explore what a compelling
(Platform as a) Product vision looks like,
dive into proven
frameworks for creating it,
and then, most importantly,
learn how to break that
the grand vision down
into smaller, manageable,
and measurable goals.
So, grab your compass,
and let's get started!
"You can do anything,
but not everything."
This quote from David Allen,
the author of "Getting Things Done",
reminds us that while we have
the potential to achieve anything,
we can't achieve
everything simultaneously.
It's about making choices and focusing
our energy on the most impactful goals.
In the context of
Platform Engineering,
this means prioritizing
the features and capabilities
that will deliver the most value to
your developers and the business,
rather than trying to
build everything at once.
Instead of diving straight
into another quote,
let's take a moment to
reflect on the previous point.
How often do we find ourselves
trying to do everything at once,
only to end up feeling
overwhelmed and unproductive?
It's a common trap, but one that we
can avoid by setting a clear direction.
Now, back to the quote
by Roy Blount Jr., which
emphasizes that the North is
a direction, not a specific destination.
Similarly, a vision
is a guiding direction,
not a SMART goal with
all the details figured out.
It's about setting a
course for the future,
allowing for flexibility and
adaptation along the way.
And there's a difference between
a Product Vision and a Product Goal.
The Product Vision
is the "tower viewer",
looking far into the future,
while the Product
Goal is a closer target,
guiding the team's
actions in the medium term.
It's about aligning the team's daily
efforts with the overarching vision,
ensuring that every step
contributes to the bigger picture.
Think big vision,
act small goals.
This graphic from the Evidence-Based
Management (EBM) Guide illustrates the
three goal horizons that can help a Product
Owner navigate the product landscape.
Think of them as tactical,
intermediate, and strategic goals.
The "Strategic Goal" is
your North Star, the vision.
But how do you get there?
Well, the EBM Guide
suggests an iterative approach:
experimenting, inspecting, and
adapting to reach those goals.
This is where the "Immediate
Tactical Goal" comes in.
It's the focus of your
current sprint or iteration,
something achievable
in the short term.
You form a hypothesis,
experiment, measure the results,
inspect what you've learned, and
adapt your approach accordingly.
It's here that Agile
ways of working shine,
allowing you to incrementally
deliver value and make progress
towards your larger
goals, adjusting as you go.
It's all about reaching strategic
goals together, step by step.
A Lean Value Tree
(LVT), is a great tool
for visualizing and
breaking down your strategy.
It starts with your vision –
that lofty, inspiring statement.
But how do you make
that vision a reality?
That's where the LVT comes in.
Beneath the vision,
you have your goals –
what specifically needs to be
achieved to realize that vision?
Then, for each
goal, you define "bets" –
these are your hypotheses about
what will drive progress towards that goal.
Finally, for each bet, you
outline the concrete initiatives –
the actual tasks you'll
undertake to test your hypotheses.
The key is to frame
everything in terms of outcomes.
What impact are you
hoping to achieve?
And how will you measure
progress and validate success?
Just like those Jobs To Be Done
we discussed in the
Platform-as-a-Product video!
The LVT forces you to connect every
action back to the overarching vision,
ensuring that your team is always working
towards the most impactful outcomes.
Think of it as brewing the
perfect strategy, drop by drop!
All right, now that we understand
the importance of vision and goals,
let's get practical.
In this section, we'll
explore the crucial step
of translating that big
vision into actionable goals.
It's important to remember that
creating a compelling vision is teamwork.
It's a collaborative process that requires
bringing the right people together,
bouncing ideas off each other,
and leading workshops
to explore the possibilities.
Don't try to do
this in a vacuum!
We'll also delve into some
useful frameworks for ideation,
helping you structure your thinking
and create a vision that truly resonates.
Creating a compelling
vision starts with
painting a bigger picture of
the future you want to create.
The text here is an
example of such a vision,
inspired by the
evolution of DevOps,
as we discussed in the
first video of this series.
It envisions a future where
everyone is a developer in some way,
and where all these
developers are empowered by
self-service Internal
Developer Platforms (IDPs),
allowing them to
focus on innovation
while specialized platform teams
handle operational responsibilities.
It's a future where cognitive load is
sustainable and delivery is accelerated.
Think tower viewer,
think far, think big.
The showcased example
of a product vision statement
is not very effective due
to its length and complexity.
It's important to keep vision statements
concise and easy to understand,
capturing the essence
of the desired future state
in a way that resonates
with everyone.
Does this statement inspire you?
The key to writing an
effective vision statement
centered on the
customer's aspirational goals,
in 15 words or less,
is to focus on the
impact you seek to make.
Make statements
convincing and effective.
American Express has
a great vision statement.
"Become essential
to our customers...
...by providing differentiated
products and services...
...to help them achieve
their aspirations."
Why is this a powerful example?
Because it's focused on the
customer, not the company.
It's about helping them
achieve their aspirations.
And that's crucial in
Platform Engineering too!
Your "customers"
are your developers,
and your vision should focus
on how you're enabling them
to be more productive,
innovative and successful.
The father of
visions, Roman Pichler,
calls the ideal product vision
Clear & stable: Every participant
should find it easy to understand,
so avoid empty phrases that
don't say anything (aka bullshit).
Broad & engaging: It should depict a
higher picture that everyone can relate to
and that inspires people to
give their best to make it happen.
And, short & sweet: It needs
to get straight to the point.
Additionally, make
it: Achievable,
Although a vision should
be a futuristic idea of what the
product might become, set a
goal that can be actually met.
Insightful: Craft the idea based
on users’ needs and motives
and define the main reason
behind the product’s existence.
Do you think the platform purpose
as described by Team Topologies
is compelling enough to be
used as a vision statement?
It's important to have a vision
that not only guides the team,
but also inspires
and motivates them,
something they can
believe in and strive towards.
This purpose, like the
American Express statement,
focuses on enabling others, in
this case, stream-aligned teams,
to achieve their goals.
By providing autonomy
and self-service capabilities,
the platform empowers
them to do their best work.
But can this
statement itself serve
as a compelling vision and truly
"sell" the value of your platform?
As we'll see in a minute,
different frameworks can help us shape such
a purpose into a more inspiring vision.
There are various frameworks for
creating vision statements out there,
each with a slightly
different perspective.
The ease of use with these
fill-in-the-blank approaches
comes in helping product teams
structure their thinking and ensure that
their vision statement is
clear, concise, and compelling.
These frameworks can help
you focus on customer value
and align with Agile principles.
In a way,
you can think of each filled-in framework
as a potential hypothesis to test.
Do our developers really
want "App Store convenience
for internal infrastructure
and services"?
That's something you can validate through
user research and iterative development.
Did you recognize the structure
of one of these frameworks
in your current vision statement
(assuming you have one)?
This view introduces Jeffrey
Moore's product vision template
as a tool for creating a concise
and compelling vision statement.
It emphasizes the importance of
understanding the target customer,
their needs, and the unique
benefits of the product.
It differs from other frameworks
by focusing on differentiation
and competitive advantage.
It's all about finding your
unique place in the market.
Or in this case within
your organization.
These examples showcase
how the same thing, an IDP,
can be positioned in
completely different ways
depending on the target
customer and their specific needs
by using Moore's
product vision template.
Notice how the first statement is
targeted at internal development teams
who need to provision cloud resources
quickly without cloud complexity.
It emphasizes ease
of use and speed.
The second statement
is for DevOps teams
managing Kubernetes
-based applications
who need flexibility
without operational burden.
It focuses on integration
and reduced overhead.
And the third statement
is aimed at product teams
who need a unified platform
experience to ship software efficiently.
Highlighting curated workflows and
deep integration with internal tooling.
The key takeaway here is
that your vision statement
and therefore your Product
Goals need to be tailored
to your specific audience
and their unique challenges.
What changes do you need to be
able to convince your stakeholders?
More on this stakeholder
perspective later.
This product vision board by Roman
Pichler captures the whole concept
of the product covering key
topics for vision formulations.
Target audience, customer needs,
product attributes, and business goals.
If you are familiar with
the Business Model Canvas
or the Lean Canvas,
you'll notice similarities.
While the Product Vision
Board prioritizes the user,
the BMC brings broader
business considerations
and the Lean Canvas focuses
on riskiest assumptions.
These models
strengthen each other.
A defined target from the PVB
informs the customer segment
on the BMC / Lean Canvas,
which can then enforce
research and economic viability.
It's not a static
one -time exercise.
Treat all of these models
like living documents,
constantly evolving
as you learn and adapt.
Revisit the product vision board
any time change becomes necessary.
Conduct further market research,
user tests, and other ways of validation.
Multiple things might change
here, and keep everybody up to date
on the current
state of the vision.
This quote by David Ogilvie,
if it doesn't sell,
it isn't creative,
reminds us that even
the most innovative ideas
need to be marketable
and compelling.
So, how can we make our
platform vision truly sell?
One fun and effective technique
is the product box innovation game.
Imagine you're designing the
packaging for your platform.
What would it look like? What
key features would you highlight?
What catchy slogan
would you use?
This exercise forces you to
distill the essence of your platform
into a concise and
compelling message.
Also, it's really important to
come up with a good product name.
Why? A great name can
capture the imagination,
create a sense of identity, and
make your platform more memorable.
A bad name, on the other hand,
can create confusion
and undermine your efforts.
Remember, think like a marketer,
and make your vision sell itself.
So, you've crafted a powerful
vision statement. Now what?
It's time to turn that
dream into reality.
And as Napoleon Hill said,
a goal is a dream
with a deadline.
Let's move on to
the Product Goal.
Crafting a Product Goal is about
bringing focus and action to that vision.
And to get there,
it has to be
Strategic: it should describe the
desired future state of the product,
tying directly back
to the overall vision.
Focused: it needs
to be specific.
Why are we unwilling
to postpone this?
Why are we willing to accept
this challenge over others?
Empirical: it needs
to support empiricism.
What's the most important
thing we need to learn first?
What's the least amount of
work needed to learn this?
Measurable outcomes: what problems
need to be solved? How will it add value?
How will we know when we've reached
the goal? And what's the deadline?
Interestingly, there are many
frameworks for creating vision statements,
but surprisingly few for
crafting Product Goals.
After setting the Product Goal,
start working on a product roadmap
and create a product backlog to
define what will fulfill the Product Goal.
Okay. It's time
for the fun part.
Now we'll start a search for suitable
candidates for your IDP Product Goal.
We'll explore different
potential focus areas
from various
stakeholder perspectives.
We'll analyze the pros and cons,
ultimately helping
you choose the goal
that best aligns with your
organization's needs and priorities.
Cue the dramatic music.
This slide reiterates the platform
purpose from Team Topologies:
Enable stream aligned teams
to deliver work autonomously
with self -service capabilities.
Think of it like a
platform mantra.
In order to reduce extraneous
cognitive load on stream aligned teams.
Combined, it's a single
purpose statement.
Now you might think,
great, that's our Product Goal.
But hold on.
A purpose statement is
directional. It's not a goal on its own.
It informs your Product Goal,
but it needs to be more specific,
more measurable, and more focused.
What specific aspect of extraneous
cognitive load are you targeting?
And how will you
measure your progress?
That's what transforms a
purpose into a true Product Goal.
Team topologies also highlights
these three key platform characteristics.
Reliable, fit for purpose,
and focused on DevEx.
Could one of these be the
foundation for a Product Goal?
Absolutely.
Each of these characteristics
represents a valuable area of focus
for your Platform Team.
The key is to drill down
and define specifically
what reliable,
fit for purpose,
or DevEx focus is.
Let's take reliable
platform as an example.
Team topologies lists several
elements that contribute to reliability.
On -call support,
service status pages,
suitable comms channels,
response time for incidents,
and planned and
announced downtime.
How could we turn
this into a Product Goal?
Instead of focusing on
a service status page,
let's phrase it as a
Jobs-To-Be-Done style to need.
When our platform has
downtime, planned or unplanned,
I want to provide
developers with insights
into the current status
in an intuitive way.
That is already way more
concrete than reliable platform.
We can continue with
such a Product Goal
by first making the service status
page visible on the developer portal,
and then try to automate
as much as possible.
Connected with the
monitoring system,
connect downtime announcements
with slack channels, etc.
See how that goal has body and
can shape the Product Backlog?
What about "Fit for
Purpose Platform"?
Team topologies suggest prototyping,
fast/regular feedback, agile practices,
few(er) services with high(er) quality,
and skilled product management.
Let's say you want to focus
on "Fast, regular feedback".
A product goal could be: "Have
a clearly defined feedback loop...
(for example: surveys, user
interviews, usage metrics),
with stream-aligned teams
for all platform services...
...by the end of Q2, as measured
by our platform service catalog".
This goal is measurable,
achievable, and directly addresses
the need for regular feedback to ensure
the platform remains fit for purpose.
And finally, a "DevEx
Focused Platform".
Here, Team Topologies emphasizes
speaking the same language
and providing the right
level of abstractions
for your engineering
teams today.
Let's say you discover
that a common pain point
is the level of abstraction
for different platform services.
A Product Goal could be:
"Have sensible defaults in place...
...for all platform services."
In line with the "opinionated
but sensible" TVP principle,
this product goal enforces a more
user-friendly platform experience
by lowering the amount of
entry-level parameters to configure.
What other options do we have
to transform this more general
DevEx-focused platform goal
to something specific
for your organization?
Perhaps you are thinking
that all the answers from the
previous slide are listed here.
Enhancing developer experience,
empowering productivity,
facilitating smooth collaboration,
accelerating release velocity,
ensuring robust security,
enabling seamless scalability,
and optimizing
operational efficiency.
Why not strive for
all of these benefits?
An IDP could have all of these
benefits, but it's crucial to remember that
"you can do anything,
but not everything"
quote from earlier.
Trying to tackle all of
these benefits at once
is a recipe for disaster.
Focus is key.
You need a specific,
intermediate Product Goal
that aligns with
your overall vision
but is achievable in a
reasonable time frame.
Think back to that
Lean Value Tree!
This slide highlights the power
of linking your Product Goals
to broader business objectives.
Each technical implementation should
directly support a key business driver,
whether it's minimizing
mistakes, increasing velocity,
improving products, enforcing
compliance, or reducing lock-in.
By explicitly connecting your
platform efforts to these objectives,
you make a stronger
case for investment
and ensure that your work is aligned
with the overall goals of the organization.
Are those objectives
applicable to your company?
We'll see in the next slide that
cost optimization and talent retention
can also be significant
business objectives.
This graphic, from Gartner's
Top Strategic Technology Trends,
showcases how Platform Engineering
aligns with critical business goals.
Gartner noted that
"forward-thinking companies have
begun to build operating platforms...
...that sit between the user and the
backing services on which they rely."
They also predict that "by 2026,
80% of software engineering organizations
will establish platform teams...
...as internal providers
of reusable services,
components, and tools
for application delivery."
You see, Gartner directly connects
Platform Engineering as a technology trend
to the business goals:
creating secure foundations,
attracting and retaining talent, and
accelerating digital transformation.
So, how does this help us
move from vision to Product Goal?
By understanding the business
imperative behind your platform vision,
you can prioritize and
select a Product Goal
that drives the most
significant business value
while still resonating
with your developers.
Are you primarily building a platform
to accelerate digital transformation?
or are you aiming to create
more secure foundations?
This informs your Product Goal and the
metrics you'll use to measure success.
Internal Developer Platforms
aren't just for developers,
they offer benefits to
the entire organization!
As promised earlier,
let's take a deeper look at
the stakeholder perspective.
This image highlights
some of the key stakeholders
and their respective interests.
Think about it from the
perspective of your CIO.
They're likely focused on slashing
lead time and time to market.
For Finance, it's all
about saving cloud costs.
Operations wants
to drive automation,
while the CISO is focused
on compliance by design.
Application Developers are
clamoring for self-service and speed,
and Architects are
driving standardization.
And what about HR?
Human Resources wants
to attract and retain talent.
Dr. Nicole Forsgren nailed it:
"It is well known that software
engineers don't leave jobs,
they leave managers. But
they also leave systems."
Building a great platform can
directly contribute to talent retention!
From this perspective, you can
see the many different directions
you could take
your Product Goal.
Let your stakeholders
be your guide!
Knowing their needs is
already half of the work.
All right. After
careful deliberation,
and considering all the business
objectives and stakeholder perspectives,
we've narrowed down our "nominees"
for the Product Goal top spot!
And the nominees are...
...for: Enabling Fast Flow!
...for: Significantly
Reducing Cognitive Load!
...for: Proactively
Enhancing Security!
These three emerged
as the most promising
based on our exploration of
aligning technical mechanisms
with overarching business goals.
As we saw, these
are all strongly related
and important in the whole
Platform Engineering context.
But it's only an example!
In your situation, you
may get other nominees.
Let's take a closer look at
each of these contenders.
So, why is fast flow
a strong contender?
In our previous videos,
we emphasized the
importance of developer velocity.
Team Topologies
perfectly summarizes
the importance of developer
velocity and state that:
"The platform acts as
an engine for fast flow...
...by increasing capacity &
speed of engineering teams."
Fast flow equals faster value
delivery and a competitive edge.
By optimizing the
platform to enable teams
to release software more
quickly and efficiently,
we directly impact
the bottom line.
And the faster you go,
the sooner you get the opportunity
to get that valuable feedback!
It's important to acknowledge
that many obstacles to fast flow
exist at the organizational level.
Things like teams being
pulled in many directions,
confusing organizational
design options,
and painful reorganizations
every few years.
However, there are
definitely plenty of areas
where an IDP can
help to improve flow.
By streamlining
deployment processes,
automating
infrastructure provisioning,
and providing
self-service capabilities,
an IDP can directly
address issues
like blocked flow and
disengaged teams.
A well designed IDP clears
the path for continuous delivery.
Just how much impact does flow
have on developer effectiveness?
Let's consider two
hypothetical scenarios.
A day in the life in a
low effective environment
versus a day in the life in a
highly effective environment.
In the first scenario, the
developer is constantly interrupted,
battling alerts, waiting on responses,
and struggling with broken processes.
The end result?
Frustration and low motivation.
In the second, highly
effective scenario,
the developer has a clear
focus, automated processes,
easy access to documentation,
and minimal interruptions.
The result?
Incremental progress and a happy developer.
Which scenario
sounds more appealing?
Which day do you
think is most valuable
for both the organization
and the developer?
Do you recognize one
of the two situations?
The contrast is stark,
and it highlights the direct link between
flow and developer effectiveness.
To truly optimize flow,
we need to focus on
what Tim Cochran calls
"micro-feedback loops".
These are the
small, repetitive tasks
that developers perform dozens,
even hundreds of times a day.
These are things
like running a unit test,
seeing a code change reflected in
your local environment, or refreshing data.
Even seemingly minor improvements
to these micro-feedback loops
can have a huge cumulative impact
on developer productivity and flow.
These micro-improvements
can have big impact.
Can you already picture
some micro-feedback loops
to improve in your current
working environment?
By focusing on optimizing these
small, often overlooked tasks,
we can unlock
significant gains in
developer velocity and
overall effectiveness.
Cognitive load reduction is the
backbone of a successful platform,
as I told you many times
throughout my videos.
Team Topologies
perfectly summarizes:
"A valuable platform reduces the
cognitive load of stream aligned teams."
By simplifying processes,
automating repetitive tasks,
and providing easy access
to essential resources,
a platform can significantly
decrease the mental effort
required for developers
to do their jobs.
While I keep talking
about cognitive load,
it's important to note that
DevEx is more than just that.
Dr. Nicole Forsgren explains the three
dimensions of developer experience.
Fast feedback loops:
The sooner we get actionable feedback,
the better our
ability to act on it.
This comes from setting up
efficient development environments,
optimizing build
and test processes,
and reducing wait times
from manual handoffs.
A flow state:
We achieve this joyful state of work
when we can perform our
tasks without interruptions.
Too many meetings and chat messages,
and there goes your flow state.
Reduced cognitive load:
It's unproductive to keep heaps of
knowledge in our working memories.
The lower the cognitive load,
the easier it is for any
technologist to build software.
We lower this cognitive load by
making information easy to access
and creating the right
level of abstractions,
and by organizing teams,
code, and documentation
such that it feels
intuitive to the team.
In the Modern Ops landscape that we
explained in the DevOps evolution video,
reducing cognitive load is the
bedrock for better developer experience.
This slide showcases the seven
pillars of a good developer experience,
according to Mogenius: tool usability,
performance, support, resources,
integration, feedback loops,
debugging, and tooling consistency.
An IDP can absolutely contribute
to many of these aspects of DevEx.
But are these pillars substantial enough
to form the basis of a Product Goal?
Perhaps.
However, I would argue
that these are often too
granular for a Product Goal.
The problem
descriptions are clear,
so they might be more
like Sprint Goal material.
Remember to keep that North
Star (strategic goal) in sight!
To truly tackle cognitive load,
we need to understand that
it's not a monolithic entity.
Team Topologies breaks it
down into three distinct types.
Intrinsic cognitive load: This relates to
the inherent complexity of the task itself,
the core skills and
knowledge required.
For example, knowing the structure of a
Java class, or how to create a new method.
Extraneous cognitive load:
This stems from the environment
and processes surrounding the task.
Things like deployment procedures,
configuration settings, and tooling.
Think, "how do I deploy
this component again?"
Or, "how do I
configure this service?"
Germane cognitive load:
This is the cognitive effort
dedicated to learning and
high-performance problem solving.
The "value-add" thinking.
For example, understanding how a
service should interact with another,
or grappling with the intricacies
of the business domain.
The intrinsic cognitive load
for a web application developer
could be the knowledge of the
computer language being used,
on top of the fundamentals
of programming.
The extraneous cognitive
load might be details of
the commands needed to instantiate
a dynamic testing environment,
which needs multiple,
hard-to-remember console commands.
And the germane cognitive load
could be the specific aspects of
the business domain that the
application developer is programming,
such as an invoicing system
or a video processing algorithm.
So, what's the ideal way to manage
these different types of cognitive load?
First, minimize
intrinsic cognitive load
through training, good technology
choices, and strategic hiring.
Then, eliminate extraneous
cognitive load altogether
by automating away boring or
superfluous tasks and commands.
This leaves more space for
germane cognitive load,
which is where the
value-add thinking lies.
Remember the
Value Line framework?
By shifting the cognitive load
from the extraneous to the germane,
you are essentially freeing up developers
to spend more time above the value line,
focusing on the activities that
directly contribute to customer value.
That's where the magic happens.
We'll come back to that
Value Line again a bit later!
Let's move on to the
final "nominee": Security.
Security is essential, but it needs to
be treated as an enabler, not a blocker.
By baking in organizational
security standards into the platform
(Compliance-as-Code!),
and enabling the platform
team to stay on top
of new security strategies, practices,
practices, tools, frameworks, and threads,
we can build secure foundations
without overwhelming developers.
The security team is the
source of knowledge here.
They are the "enabling team".
This visual emphasizes that
while the security team
acts as an enabling team,
providing guidance
and expertise,
there's still a
significant amount
of security related
responsibilities for product teams.
From vulnerability checking
and secure code analysis
to authentication and
secrets management,
developers can no longer claim to
be blissfully ignorant about security.
Let's see how a
platform can help here.
Security is everywhere and still complex to
set up and control in a cloud-native world.
A pure "shift left"
approach to DevSecOps
can create a cognitive
overload for developers.
As Kelsey Hightower
famously said,
"I think we are asking
developers to do too much...
...by shifting everything
left, including security.
While it should be
a collective effort,
the idea that developers need
to become security experts...
...in addition to everything
else just isn't sustainable."
Here's a message for your
Chief Information Security Officer.
Platform Engineering
loves security.
Your platform can abstract
and standardize most of it.
So shift down to your platform,
not left to your developers.
Platform Engineering teams
can embed governance and
scalable security controls
within the infrastructure,
freeing developers to focus
on code and business value,
instead of being an afterthought or
a blocker for developer productivity.
A platform with
organizational standards built-in
can offload product
teams significantly
by offering compliance
and security as code.
Instead of expecting developers
to become security experts,
the platform provides
secure-by-default infrastructure
and automated compliance checks.
Now you see "Compliance
as Code" appearing!
Does this image look familiar?
You might recognize it from
the DevOps evolution video.
As we discussed, a dedicated
platform team serves as the central hub,
coordinating across critical functions
such as security and compliance.
This visual perfectly illustrates the
power of a well-designed platform.
It not only provides cognitive
offloading from a knowledge perspective,
but also reduces the number
of interactions required.
By centralizing security and
compliance checks within the platform,
we minimize the number of queries
directed at individual product teams,
streamlining workflows
and freeing up valuable time.
The "2024 State of DevOps"
report confirms
that security is a major
trend in Platform Engineering.
The report states: "The biggest takeaway
from our survey this year surprised us.
Not only are Platform Engineering teams
supporting security and compliance efforts,
but they are tackling and
troubleshooting issues around security...
...in a way that suggests this is
going to be a much larger trend."
Even when security isn't your
primary driver and Product Goal,
it's definitely a topic
that cannot be ignored.
It might not win
the "top spot" today,
but it is most definitely a
force to be reckoned with.
Alright, the moment
you've all been waiting for!
After considering
the potential impact,
alignment with our vision
and overall strategic value,
it's time to announce the
winning Product Goal topic.
The winners are...
In third place, for its
essential contribution to
a secure and reliable
platform: Security!
In second place, for
its direct impact on
value delivery and
business outcomes: Fast Flow!
And taking the top spot
for its fundamental role in
improving developer experience:
Cognitive Load Reduction!
However, it's important to
remember that this is just an example.
The key takeaway here
is to prioritize based on a balanced
and well thought out understanding
of your specific context
and business needs.
And of course, you can only
have one Product Goal at a time,
the most strategic
one to start with!
Let's find out why I've put cognitive
load reduction in this leading position.
As Armon Dadgar
visualizes here,
an IDP provides "consistency",
which splits into "cost"
and "risk" on the Ops side,
and "velocity" on the dev side.
Let's call velocity "Option A"
and consistency "Option B".
Now, based on our previous
video about the DevOps evolution,
and how Platform Engineering's
purpose is to reduce cognitive load,
it makes sense to focus a Product
Goal on the development side of the IDP:
Option A, velocity.
Cognitive load reduction
is a foundational principle,
and cognitive load reduction
is an "engine for fast flow".
But fast flow also helps
to reduce cognitive load
and improve DevEx in general.
So, which one comes first?
Well, that focus also depends
on the type of organization.
Do you value a better flow of
work more, or the human factor?
Although they go hand in hand,
I subjectively value happiness
over productivity here.
Another reason for not putting
security in that leading position
is because as we discussed in
the Platform-as-a-Product video,
platforms are optional to use.
Even though security standards
built-in should be a UDP,
reality is often that
it's seen as a burden.
With the "opinionated
but sensible" TVP principle,
organizational standards
are built-in as a convention
for things like security
and compliance,
while offering sensible
but adjustable defaults,
we‘re linking consistency
(Option B) with velocity (Option A).
So, we've talked about
crafting visions and goals
and we've even chosen a
"winning" Product Goal topic.
But setting a goal - truly committing
to a direction - has implications.
As the dictionary says,
an implication is "the conclusion
that can be drawn from something...
...although it is not
explicitly stated."
Let's take a quick look at how the
Product Goal fits into the Scrum framework.
As the Scrum guide states,
"A Scrum team is focused on one
objective at a time, the Product Goal."
The Product Goal provides
a long-term objective
and describes a future
state of the product
that the team can plan against.
But honestly,
isn't the concept of
having a clear, focused
objective something valuable
regardless of whether
you're using Scrum or not?
For those of you
familiar with Scrum,
you know that the Product Goal is like the
cornerstone of Scrum events and artifacts.
It's reinstated in
Sprint Planning,
it shapes the Product Backlog,
each Increment should contribute to it,
and progress is discussed
in the Sprint Review.
How often are the
Product Vision and/or
Product Goal reinstated
during your development cycle?
"Strategy is figuring
out what not to do."
This quote from Steve Jobs gets
straight to the heart of strategy.
Vision and Product
Goals should be the basis
that guides decisions and
helps prioritize features or tasks.
Does this feature
contribute to the goal?
If not, channel your energy
into activities that truly matter.
Saying "no" is tough,
but it's essential!
So ask yourself,
is our backlog a true
reflection of a clear direction,
aligned with our Product Goal?
Mark Zuckerberg reminds us:
"I'm here to build something for the
long-term. Anything else is a distraction."
This highlights the importance
of avoiding distractions
and constantly asking if
you're spending your time well.
If something is a distraction
from the Product Goal,
saying "no" helps you to stay focused
on the most impactful activities
and prevents your goals
from remaining unachieved.
In terms of the EBM model we
discussed earlier, it all needs to align:
Are our Sprint Goals the next logical
step towards achieving our Product Goal?
Richard L. Evans
puts it perfectly:
"Your direction is more
important than your speed."
This video, and Product Goal-setting
in general, is all about direction.
"Building the things
right" is important,
but only if we're "building the
right things" in the first place.
In product management terms, it's a
shift in focus from delivery to discovery.
And, as we emphasized in
the Platform-as a-Product video,
building a successful platform requires
continuous discovery and feedback.
So, are we ready
for that shift in focus?
Okay, so you've crafted
a compelling vision
and defined a
strategic Product Goal.
But that's only half the battle.
Now, you need to ensure that everyone
understands and buys into that vision.
That's where effective
communication comes in.
You may not have a big hall
like this, but the message is clear:
You need to actively and repeatedly
communicate the Product Vision
and Product Goal to everyone
involved in the development process.
Stakeholders must know the
direction in which you are heading,
and that knowledge
gives them confidence.
Share the vision
and goal in any form.
Presentations, boards, posters,
one-on-one meetings, and so on.
And... repeat, repeat, repeat!
Start every Sprint Planning,
every Sprint Review
with reinstating the Product
Vision and Product Goal.
A powerful way to communicate
your vision is with metrics.
They are far more
than just numbers.
Data is a communication tool,
as Nicole Forsgren highlights here.
The data provides: opportunities to clarify
and define what those metrics even are;
A shared language between teams, enabling
effective collaboration and alignment;
and data-informed insights,
moving teams away from
relying solely on intuition and
towards a more objective understanding.
Without a clear
Product Vision and -Goal,
the Product Owner
is like a tugboat,
painstakingly pulling each "ship",
your development teams, individually.
Instead, your Product
Vision is a lighthouse,
providing a clear
and constant beacon,
and your Product Goal as
a clearly mapped course.
Your ships can then navigate
safely and efficiently on their own.
This also frees the Product
Owner or Product Manager
to operate at a more
strategic, macro level,
ensuring the platform is aligned
with the overall business objectives.
What does this mean in
terms of communication?
It means that your role isn't just about
giving directions (the what and how),
but giving direction (the why).
Simon Sinek
captures this perfectly:
"There is a difference between
giving directions and giving direction."
One more thing...
You know, we've talked
a lot about visions, goals,
and all the wonderful things a
platform can do for developers.
But there's an important foundational
element we haven't really addressed yet.
Platform Engineering
is NOT just for the cloud.
In fact, on-prem environments
often need self-service and automation
even more than cloud environments!
But the reality is,
moving towards an API-driven,
automatable infrastructure
with simple and powerful
container management
can be a huge challenge when you're
starting with legacy on-prem systems.
So, how do you get there?
To create an IDP, we build it
upon underlying infrastructure layers.
If those IDPs consist of reusable
components, building blocks,
glued together
into golden paths,
then that IDP needs those
infrastructure building blocks
to come in an automated way: as
infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS).
And that's not self-evident in an
on-premise infrastructure setting.
So, fix the infra first!
Footnote: "Fix the infra first"
primarily refers to automating
technical provisioning.
However, a platform can also
start as something simpler,
like a well-organized wiki with
documented standards and best practices.
This is what Evan Bottcher
calls the "superficial private cloud".
You know, something like cloud,
but really just
old-fashioned IT operations
with a thin veneer
of automation.
Take a look at this workflow.
What's happening here?
It's "TicketOps" - work being
delegated from team to team.
The manual work and
this “backlog coupling”
(dependencies across work queues)
is creating those
long lead times
that are unacceptable in
today's software environment.
A key point of Platform Engineering is
to unblock infrastructure provisioning.
That means treating
your on-prem environment
as an "internal cloud"
with IaaS capabilities.
In team topologies language,
it's about moving away from "blocking
dependencies based on work handovers"
and towards "non-blocking dependencies
based on growing capabilities".
It's important to be realistic
about where you are.
Unrealistic product goals can lead
to frustration and disappointment.
That's why, in many cases, it's better
to focus on "fixing" that IaaS layer first,
even if that means setting
an intermediate Product Goal
that's not about
Golden Paths yet.
For example, instead of immediately
striving for full IDP functionality,
you might focus on
"Empowering DevOps teams...
...with a unified
self-service platform...
...that delivers reusable
building blocks as-a-Service,
has organizational standards built-in,
and provides actionable insights."
And as we discussed in the IDP
and Platform-as-a-Product videos,
a clear vocabulary and
visualizations like Kratix Promises
can help with scoping and
communicating your Product Goals
in a realistic and
actionable way.
Remember the Value Line
framework we talked about earlier,
and in the Platform-as-a-Product video?
Your platform team eventually
wants to focus on the "Core",
like that "floating platform" concept
of Gregor Hohpe we discussed before.
But even with the
best intentions,
the infrastructure, which represents
"Context" from your team's perspective,
simply cannot be ignored.
It underpins everything.
Expanding on that thought,
let's look at the relationship between
the three aforementioned layers
of Infrastructure,
Platforms, and Applications.
In fact, there are
two Value Lines here.
From a Core/Context perspective,
it would make sense if the
Platform Team didn't have to focus
on the infrastructural building blocks
because they're "Context" for them.
And in a public cloud
setting, that's often the case.
The cloud provider handles
the underlying infrastructure.
However, in on-prem scenarios,
you face some critical decisions.
Option 1: create a brand
new Platform Team.
This requires that you also
have a capable infrastructure team
already operating at an IaaS level,
providing the foundational building blocks.
Pros: clear separation of concerns,
dedicated focus on platform user needs.
Cons: requires significant budget for a
new team, can be a steep learning curve,
and the new Platform Team needs
to build trust and credibility quickly.
It can also highlight the cognitive
load for existing developers.
Option 2: have the
existing infrastructure team
move up the stack and take
on platform responsibilities.
Pros: Leverages existing expertise
and infrastructure knowledge,
and potentially more
budget-friendly.
Cons: Can create a massive
cognitive load for the existing team.
Crucially, many Ops engineers
lack the Product Management skills
or SDLC understanding to
build a truly user-centric platform.
They may also prioritize
consistency (Option B from before).
The key takeaway here is that the combined
infrastructure and platform responsibility
for a single team can create
a new cognitive bottleneck.
Remember, you can reassign
cognitive load, but you can't eliminate it!
Which of the aforementioned
options would you choose?
I'm curious to hear
your view here.
Wow, you've made it to the end.
Thank you for watching.
Let's recap the key takeaways.
- A clear Vision and Product
Goal is key to success.
- Don't try to do
everything at once.
- Focus on the most
impactful business goals.
- Communicate your vision
clearly and constantly.
- And remember, in on-prem
environments, fix the infrastructure first.
I hope you found this session
insightful and engaging.
Be sure to check
out my next video,
"Professional Development: Roles in
a Platform Engineering Product Team",
where we'll dive into the organizational
side of Platform Engineering.
See you there!
Thank you for sticking
around to the end.
The remainder of this video contains
an overview of all resources used.
There's some
great stuff out there,
often with references
to even more great stuff.
Are you ready to go
down this rabbit hole?